Create exclude-patterns.md (#373)
in-toto/in-toto: doc/source/exclude_patterns.md

> # Exclude Pattern Settings 

Reviewer: I guess this file came back during a rebase?

Author: Oops! Fill fix it up and squash the commits

  - Single asterisks match everything except a slash. 
  - Question marks match any one character except a slash.
  
  More information about pattern formats found in [gitignore documentation](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore). 

## Special Patterns
### Pattern beginning with a slash
  - Match paths directly on the root directory instead of descendant paths. Escape the relative root conversion with an forward slash to match absolute paths. (i.e., 
 `//<pattern>`). 

### Patterns without a beginning slash
  - A single pattern without a beginning slash will match any descendant path, equivalent to `**/<pattern>"`. This also holds for a single pattern with a trailing slash (e.g. `dir/`). 
  - A pattern without a beginning slash but contains at least one prepended directory (e.g. `dir/<pattern>`) should not match `**/dir/<pattern>`. 

### Patterns ending with a slash 
  - A pattern ending with a slash will match all descendant paths if it is a directory level but not if it is a regular file. This is equivalent to `{pattern}/**`.

## Source
The source code for `pathspec` is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/cpburnz/python-path-specification).

## Documentation

> Documentation for ```pathspec``` is available on [Read the Docs](http://python-path-specification.readthedocs.io/).   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [```pathspec```](http://python-path-specification.readthedocs.io/)
```

Perhaps?

Reviewer: and same for gitignore

# Exclude Pattern Settings 

> ```--exclude``` is an optional command-line argument for [in-toto-run](https://in-toto.readthedocs.io/en/latest/command-line-tools/in-toto-run.html) that uses [PathSpec](http://python-path-specification.readthedocs.io) while ```exclude_pattern``` is an API argument that follows [gitignore-style patterns](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore) and may be specified via the ```ARTIFACT_EXCLUDE_PATTERNS``` setting.

Reviewer: > ```--exclude``` is an optional command-line argument for [in-toto-run](https://in-toto.readthedocs.io/en/latest/command-line-tools/in-toto-run.html)

So far so good.

> that uses [PathSpec](http://python-path-specification.readthedocs.io) while ```exclude_pattern``` is an API argument that follows [gitignore-style patterns](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore) and may be specified via the ```ARTIFACT_EXCLUDE_PATTERNS``` setting.

I think it gets confused here.

They aren't two separate things. We have [`runlib`](https://github.com/in-toto/in-toto/blob/develop/in_toto/runlib.py) which provides the `in_toto_run` API. This API accepts `exclude_patterns` as an optional argument. Then, we have have the `in-toto-run` CLI tool which accepts `--exclude-patterns` as an optional argument. However, they aren't doing anything separately. `in-toto-run` merely uses the API in `runlib` to provide all functionality, including exclude patterns. Any exclude patterns passed in via the CLI argument is just passed on to the API appropriately.

The API uses PathSpec to implement this functionality because we want gitignore-like patterns, which PathSpec promises.

Author: Took a while to find the words to merge the API and CLI definitions into one, but I rewrote it below. 

The optional argument ```exclude_patterns``` in the ```in_toto_run``` API used by ```--exclude``` in the```in-toto-run``` command line tool applies [PathSpec](http://python-path-specification.readthedocs.io) to compile [gitignore-style patterns](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore).

> The feature prevents given paths and hashes of 'materials' (files before command execution) and 'products' (files after command execution) from being written together with other information (executed command, return value, stdout and stderr) in generating link metadata files. When a given pattern's directory is excluded, all its files and subdirectories are excluded as well.

Reviewer: While I think this is mostly right in spirit, we may want to talk about in terms of files matched by the pattern, and them being entirely excluded from being recorded as materials or products. Mentioning other information that we do record, while correct, may just confuse the reader.

> When a given pattern's directory is excluded, all its files and subdirectories are excluded as well.

Perhaps we can say "If a pattern matches a directory, all the files and subdirectories within that directory are also excluded."

Author: Removed the details and reworded!

> # Pattern Format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pattern Formats / Structures
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure if just format is enough here, but I can really go either way

Author: Format and structure seem to have the same definition, so it might be more simple to specify it as one or the other.

  - A backslash must be included in front of patterns beginning with a literal hash or exclamation mark. 
  - The slash is a directory seperator. Separators at beginning or middle (or both) of a pattern are relative to directory level of particular .gitignore file. Separators at the end of the pattern only  match directories. 
  - Beginning double asterisks match any leading path segments, inner double asterisks match multiple (or zero) inner path segments, and ending double asterisks match any trailing path segments. Single asterisks match everything except a slash. 
  - Question marks match any one character except a slash.

> ## Special Patterns

Reviewer: Curious here, more than sure. Most of the sub-points here have a single bullet point, bar one. Should we use paragraphs there instead?

Author: I followed the [official .gitignore documentation ](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore/2.20.0) structure of listing the pattern formats. It may be easier to find quickly than if the information would be in paragraph form, but would be happy to fix it up to look more aesthetically pleasing.

> 1. ### Pattern beginning with a slash ###

Reviewer: We don't need the numbers here, let's just use the `###` to subhead them.

Also, you don't need to "close" with a `###`.

The entire line can just be `### Patterns beginning with a slash`.

Author: Agreed!

>   - Match paths on the root directly instead of any descendant paths by making a pattern relative to root. Escape the relative root conversion with an extra forward slash in front so as to match absolute paths. (i.e, "//"). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Match paths on the root directly instead of any descendant paths by making a pattern relative to root. Escape the relative root conversion with an extra forward slash in front so as to match absolute paths. (i.e., `//<rest of the pattern>`). 
```

I think we should use backticks when talking about pattern specific characters, as here.

> 2. ### Pattern that is a slash ###

Reviewer: same here, and below

>   - According to 'git check-ignore' (v2.4.1), a single '/' does not match any file

Reviewer: I wonder how we want to do this. My distro, for example, has a newer version of git. Can we point to the current gitignore documentation for these (while also mentioning them)?

Author: I've linked the current gitignore documentation in the documentation section, but it doesn't say anything about a single slash pattern. Furthermore, I can't seem to find the documentation for 'git check-ignore' (v2.4.1) to verify this but I included the 'git ignore' document the [Pathspec documentation](https://github.com/cpburnz/python-path-specification/blob/master/pathspec/patterns/gitwildmatch.py#L59-L61) refers to and utilizes.

Reviewer: Yeah, I think we can remove references to `git check-ignore` which is a CLI tool to check against `.gitignore` for specific paths in the repository. Let's just state the fact and move on, and the links to the docs at the bottom should handle the rest, especially since we start the document naming both PathSpec and gitignore.

3. ### Patterns without beginning slash ###
  - A pattern without a beginning slash but contains at least one prepended directory (e.g ``` dir/{pattern} ```) should not match ``` **/dir/{pattern} ``` according to 'git-check-ignore' (v2.4.1.)
  - A single pattern without a beginning slash will match any descendant path, equivalent to ``` **/{pattern} ```. So, prepend with double-asterisks to make a pattern relative to the root. This also holds for a single pattern with a trailing slash (e.g. ```dir/```). 

4. ### Patterns ending with a slash ###
  - A pattern ending with a slash ('/' will match all descendant paths if it is a directory but not if it is a regular file, equivalent to ``` {pattern}/** ```. So, set the last segment to double asterisks to include all descendants. 

5. ### Patterns beginning with a literal hash ###
  - Serves as a comment (neither includes or excludes files). Escape the hash with a back-slash to match a literal hash (i.e., '\#'). 

6. ### Patterns beginning with an exclamation mark ###
  - Matched patterns will be unmatched. Escape the exclamation mark with a back-slash to match a literal exclamation mark (i.e, '\!').

## Pattern Format Examples

>   - The pattern ``` hello.* ``` matches any file or folder whose name begins with **hello**. If one wants to restrict this only to the directory and not in its subdirectories, one can prepend the pattern with a slash, i.e. ``` /hello.*``` ; the pattern now matches ``` hello.txt, hello.c```  but not ``` a/hello.java ```. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The pattern `hello.*` matches any file or folder whose name begins with **hello**. If one wants to restrict this only to the directory and not in its subdirectories, one can prepend the pattern with a slash, i.e. `/hello.*`; the pattern now matches `hello.txt, hello.c` but not `a/hello.java`. 
```

Reviewer: There are some spacing inconsistencies here and elsewhere. Also, a single backtick is enough to enclose code in-line.

Reviewer: Feel free to mark a review comment thread as resolved when done. :)

# Exclude Pattern Settings 

## Introduction

The optional argument `exclude_patterns` in the `in_toto_run` API, also used by `--exclude` in the ```in-toto-run``` command line tool, applies [pathspec](http://python-path-specification.readthedocs.io) to compile [gitignore-style patterns](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore).

> Passed in arguments such as the paths and hashes of 'materials' (files before command execution) and 'products' (files after command execution) are not recorded with other information when generating link metadata files. If a pattern matches a directory, all files and subdirectories within that directory are also excluded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Artifacts (materials and products) matched by an exclude pattern are not recorded when generating link metadata. If a pattern matches a directory, all files and subdirectories are also excluded.
```

Author: Should we provide definitions of materials/products as previously, or is it assumed that users of the feature already know what materials and products are?

Reviewer: I personally think it's safe to say they know what materials and products are if they're using exclude patterns.

  - A slash followed by two consecutive asterisks and a slash matches path segments between two directories (e.g., `a/**/b` matches `a/b`, `a/x/b`, `a/x/y/b` and so on). 
  - Single asterisks match everything except a slash. 
  - Question marks match any one character except a slash.

## Special Patterns
### Pattern beginning with a slash
  - Match paths directly on the root directory instead of descendant paths. Escape the relative root conversion with an forward slash to match absolute paths. (i.e., 
 `//<pattern>`). 

### Patterns without a beginning slash
  - A single pattern without a beginning slash will match any descendant path, equivalent to `**/<pattern>"`. This also holds for a single pattern with a trailing slash (e.g. `dir/`). 
  - A pattern without a beginning slash but contains at least one prepended directory (e.g. `dir/<pattern>`) should not match `**/dir/<pattern>` according to 'git-check-ignore' (v2.4.1.)

### Patterns ending with a slash 
  - A pattern ending with a slash will match all descendant paths if it is a directory level but not if it is a regular file. This is equivalent to `{pattern}/**`.

### Pattern that is a slash 

>   - According to 'git check-ignore' (v2.4.1), a single '/' does not match any file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - According to 'git check-ignore' (v2.4.1), a single `/` does not match any file
```

### Pattern beginning with literal hash 
  - Serves as a comment (neither includes or excludes files). Escape the hash with a back-slash to match a literal hash (i.e., `\#`). 

### Pattern beginning with exclamation mark 

>   - Matched patterns will be unmatched. Escape the exclamation mark with a back-slash to match a literal exclamation mark (i.e., `\!`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - This has the effect of negating the rest of the pattern. Artifacts matched by the rest of the pattern will be the only ones recorded, and everything else will be excluded. Escape the exclamation mark with a back-slash to match a literal exclamation mark (i.e., `\!`).
```

## Source

> The source code for `pathspec` is available on [GitHub.](https://github.com/cpburnz/python-path-specification)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The source code for `pathspec` is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/cpburnz/python-path-specification).
```

Author: Fixed :)

# Exclude Pattern Settings 

> - Optional argument for [in-toto-run.](https://in-toto.readthedocs.io/en/latest/command-line-tools/in-toto-run.html) Path patterns to match paths that should not be recorded as 'materials' or 'products'.  Passed patterns override patterns defined in environment variables or config files (see ```ARTIFACT_EXCLUDE_PATTERNS``` documentation for additional info) 

Reviewer: Line length alert!

Let's keep them <= 80. Also note that you don't need to add a space at the end of a line or beginning of the next line.

Author: Fixed it up a bit, let me know if the length works!

> - Uses [PathSpec](http://python-path-specification.readthedocs.io) to compile [gitignore-style patterns](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore), implementing GitWildMatchPattern class which itself is derived from [Rsync's wildmatch](https://github.com/AndyA/rsync/blob/master/lib/wildmatch.c)   

Reviewer: I think this should be clarified. Do you mean git's patterns are derived from rsync's wildmatch?

Author: Yep! I think that we might not need that detail since we're focusing on and linking the Pathspec documentation, which already does a fantastic job describing how Git's patterns are derived from RSync's wild match.

- If a directory is excluded, all its files and subdirectories are also excluded
- Exclude patterns are likely to become command line arguments or part of a config file.
- Pattern Format
  - Include backslash (' \\ ') in front of first hash for patterns that begin with a literal hash
  - Trailing spaces are ignored unless quote with backslash (' \\ ')

>   - Prefix '!' negates the pattern. Excluded patterns will become included again 

Reviewer: > Excluded patterns will become included again

I think this can be a little confusing. Let's talk about it in terms of the files matched by the pattern as a whole.

Author: Removed the comment from pattern formats as a whole and think it would be more appropriate in the special patterns section and changed up the wording.

>   - The slash (' / ') is used as a directory separator. Separators at beginning or middle (or both) of pattern are relative to directory level of particular .gitignore file. If there is a separator at the end of the pattern then the pattern will only match directories. 

Reviewer: I wonder if backticks are appropriate here (and elsewhere).

```suggestion
  - The slash (`/`) is used as a directory separator. Separators at beginning or middle (or both) of pattern are relative to directory level of particular .gitignore file. If there is a separator at the end of the pattern then the pattern will only match directories. 
```

Author: Decided to remove all the said characters and only include it in text, except in examples!

  - Asterisk (' * ') matches anything except a slash (' / ')
  - Question mark (' ? ') matches any one character except a slash (' / ')
  - Pattern consisting solely of double-asterisks (' ** ') matches every path
  - Pattern beginning with double-asterisks will match any leading path segments
  - Pattern ending with double-asterisks will match any trailing path segments
  - Pattern with inner double-asterisks will match multiple (or zero) inner path segments 

> # Special Characters / Edge Cases 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Special Characters / Edge Cases 
```

Sub headings :)

Author: Fixed, thanks for the heads up :) . Also decided to rename it to "Special Patterns" as it seems more fitting.

> 1. **Patterns beginning with ' / '**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Patterns beginning with ' / '
```
sub sub heading?

Author: I was thinking that might be slightly confusing since it looks similar the sub-heading, but it still looks organized. Updated them, but let me know if you share the same concerns :)

7. **Patterns beginning with ' \\ '**
  - Removes leading back-slash escape for escape hash or exclamation mark

# Pattern Format Examples
  - The pattern ``` hello.* ``` matches any file or folder whose name begins with **hello**. If one wants to restrict this only to the directory and not in its subdirectories, one can prepend the pattern with a slash, i.e. ``` /hello.*``` ; the pattern now matches ``` hello.txt, hello.c```  but not ``` a/hello.java ```. 
  - The pattern ``` foo/ ``` will match a directory **foo** and paths underneath it, but will not match a regular file or a symbolic link **foo** (this is consistent with the way how pathspec works in general in Git)
  - The pattern ```doc/frotz``` and ```/doc/frotz``` have the same effect as a ```.gitignore file```. In other words, a leading slash is not relevant if there is already a middle slash in the pattern.
  - The pattern ```foo/*```, matches ```foo/test.json``` (a regular file), ``` foo/bar ``` (a directory), but it does not match ``` foo/bar/hello.c``` (a regular file), as the asterisk in the pattern does not match ``` bar/hello.c```  which has a slash in it.

> # Source Code

Reviewer: I think we don't need the source code section. Perhaps we can include a link, but I'm still wary as we'd have to go by line number which can change. Perhaps just a mention to look in runlib.

Author: Agreed, especially since it IS a helper function.

``` 
def _apply_exclude_patterns(names, exclude_filter):
                                                                                    
 """ Exclude matched patterns from passed names. """
 included = set(names)

 # Assume old way for easier testing
 if hasattr(exclude_filter, '__iter__'):
   exclude_filter = PathSpec.from_lines('gitwildmatch', exclude_filter)

 for excluded in exclude_filter.match_files(names):
   included.discard(excluded)

 return sorted(included)
 ``` 

> # Exclude Pattern Arguments

Reviewer: `_apply_exclude_patterns` is "private" so I'm not certain we need this in the doc.

Author: Fixed!

1. names
  - List of patterns to be recorded as 'materials' or 'products' link metadata 
2. exclude_filter
  - List of patterns to be excluded from 'materials' or 'products' link metadata 

> # Tutorial

Reviewer: I wonder if the pattern examples above suffices. I also doubt we want people using `_apply_exclude_patterns` directly. It's a helper function. :)

Author: Yep, removed the tutorials, source-code, and arguments section!
